Blog post about the FullInliner bug in 0.8.21 (#11)
ethereum/solidity-website: src/posts/2023-07-19-full-inliner-non-expression-split-argument-evaluation-order-bug.md

---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'FullInliner Non-Expression-Split Argument Evaluation Order Bug'
date: '2023-07-19'
author: Solidity Team
category: Security Alerts
---

> On July 4, 2023, Robert Chen from OtterSec discovered a bug in Yul optimizer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On July 4, 2023, Robert Chen from OtterSec discovered a bug in the Yul optimizer.
```

4. Code in non-expression-split form being able to reach the `FullInliner` step.

    It is not generally possible for the user to precisely control whether the code coming out of the
    code generator is or is not in this form.
    However, it is guaranteed that the code passed through the
    [`ExpressionSplitter` step](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.21/internals/optimizer.html#expression-splitter) (`x`)
    is expression-split, and the opposite is true for code that is run through the
    [`ExpressionJoiner` step](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.21/internals/optimizer.html#expression-joiner) (`j`).
    Therefore sequences where `i` is always preceded by `x` with no intervening occurrences of `j` are safe.
    Other sequences may or may not be affected depending on their exact structure.

Lack of user-provided Yul code (in the form of inline assembly or pure Yul input) significantly
decreases the chances of triggering the bug.

The bug affects both the legacy and the IR-based compilation pipeline.
This is primarily due to the fact that inline assembly is passed through the Yul optimizer
regardless of which pipeline is used.

> Also, certain language features are compiled from internal Yul code even by the legacy code generator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, certain language features are compiled from internal Yul code, even by the legacy code generator.
```

## Technical Details

The immediate cause of the buggy behavior is the fact that `FullInliner` does not preserve the
evaluation order of arguments in function calls it inlines.

> When the arguments are themselves function calls with side-effects, a change in the order may alter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the arguments are themselves function calls with side effects, a change in the order may alter
```

the results of contract execution.

The evaluation order was originally assumed not to pose any problems since function calls
where it matters should never have been subject to inlining.
The step was designed to follow `ExpressionSplitter`, which converts the code into the
expression-split form, where all call arguments are simple identifiers.
Any non-expression-split call appearing in the input was supposed to be ignored, which was not
actually the case as it turned out.

Despite these flaws, the problem did not affect the compiler in practice because the default optimizer
sequence was carefully chosen to always run `ExpressionSplitter` before `FullInliner`.

> However, the later introduction of a mechanism which allowed users to supply a custom sequence

Author: Well, the sentence above already says `optimizer sequence` and I'm trying to avoid being too repetitive :)

> However, the later introduction of a mechanism which allowed users to supply a custom sequence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the later introduction of a mechanism which allowed users to supply a custom sequence
```
```suggestion
However, the later introduction of a mechanism that allowed users to supply a custom sequence
```

made it possible to trigger the bug.

### Optimizer Step Sequence

Yul optimizer works by refining the unoptimized IR produced by the code generator in
[discrete steps](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/0.8.21/internals/optimizer.html#optimizer-steps),
each one receiving the output of the previous one.
The order of steps is determined by the step sequence.

> Initially the sequence was hard-coded in compiler's source code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Initially, the sequence was hard-coded in compiler's source code.
```

Version 0.6.7 introduced options that allow the user to
[customize the steps to be executed and their order](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.21/internals/optimizer.html#selecting-optimizations).
This is done via `settings.optimizer.details.yulDetails.optimizerSteps` in Standard JSON or `--yul-optimizations` on the CLI.

Choosing a good sequence is not an easy task.
It requires awareness of both how individual steps work, and which other steps transform the code in ways
that are beneficial or detrimental to their operation.
For example many steps benefit from code being in the [SSA form](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_single-assignment_form).
The [`SSATransform` step](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.21/internals/optimizer.html#ssa-transform) (`a`)
provides that form, but also introduces redundant assignments, which is why it is usually combined with
[`RedundantAssignEliminator`](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.21/internals/optimizer.html#redundant-assign-eliminator) (`r`).
[`ConditionalSimplifier`](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.21/internals/optimizer.html#conditional-simplifier)

> is a step that works best when the code is in the SSA form while at the same time destroying this property,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is a step that works best when the code is in the SSA form but it destroys this property,
```

which can affect the effectiveness of steps executed later in sequence.

The [default sequence](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/v0.8.21/libsolidity/interface/OptimiserSettings.h#L44-L62)
was carefully chosen and refined over time to provide well optimized code.
While it still has room for improvement (especially in terms of performance), it ensures
that prerequisites of all steps are met.

### Argument Evaluation Order in Yul

In Yul the order in which expressions passed as arguments to function calls is always right to left.
For example:

```yul
f(add(mload(0), mload(x)), mload(1))
```

The bytecode emitted for this expression will evaluate expressions in the following order:
- `mload(1)`
- `mload(x)`
- `mload(0)`
- `add(...)`
- `f(...)`

Note that the order does not matter when the expressions have no side-effects.

> Even if `mload(0)` was evaluated before `mload(x)`, behavior of his code fragment would not change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even if `mload(0)` was evaluated before `mload(x)`, the behavior of this code fragment would not change.
```

> The introduction of side-effects, changes this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, the introduction of side-effects, changes this:
```

```yul
function store(x, y) -> r {
    sstore(x, y)
    r := y
}

add(sload(0), store(0, k))
```

Evaluating `store()` after `sload()` in the code above would change the result.

### Expression-Split Form

The job of the expression splitter is to transform the code into a simpler form that is
easier for some other optimizer steps to work with and not affected by the choice of evaluation order.
This transformation involves evaluating call arguments first and storing the results in new variables.
Then those variables are passed to the call instead.

For example:

```yul
add(sload(0), store(0, k))
```

Would be transformed into:

```yul
let _a := k
let _b := 0
let _x := store(_b, _a)
let _c := 0
let _y := sload(_c)
let _z := add(_y, _x)
```

> Note that in the transformed code there is no ambiguity as to the order of side-effects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that in the transformed code, there is no ambiguity as to the order of side-effects
```

and evaluating function arguments in a different order would not affect it.

### `FullInliner` and Inlining of Function Calls

`FullInliner` uses heuristics to determine which function calls would be better off replaced by
instructions from the function body, and performs the replacement.

> By itself this makes the code less optimal in most cases, because it increases the code size and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By itself, this makes the code less optimal in most cases because it increases the code size and
```

does not have significant effect on the cost of execution.
However, the benefit of this step is that it enables other steps (which usually do not work across

> function boundaries), to better optimize the resulting code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function boundaries) to better optimize the resulting code.
```

> When inlining a function, the inliner needs to ensure that its arguments will be evaluated properly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When inlining a function, the inliner needs to ensure that its arguments will be appropriately evaluated.
```

Author: `appropriately evaluated` sounds a bit odd to me in this context. It's like it puts emphasis not on the thing I wanted emphasized.

Changed to "evaluated the same way as in the call".

Yul has three kinds of expressions that can be used as call arguments:
- Literals (e.g. `0x42` or `0`)
- Identifiers (e.g. `k` or `ret`)
- Function calls (e.g. `f(x)` or `sstore(0, sload(x))`)

Let's consider a function `f()` defined as follows:

```yul
function f(a, b) -> r {
    let c := mul(a, 4)
    let r := add(c, b)
}
```

When called with a literal or an identifier, inlining is straightforward:

```yul
let k := 0x42
f(24, k)
```

The call can be simply replaced with the body of the function as long as we take care to rename
variables to avoid name clashes:

```yul
let k := 0x42
let _q := 24
let _p := k
let _c := mul(_q, 4)
let _r := add(_c, _p)
```

Introducing function calls as arguments, however, requires paying more attention to the evaluation order.
Let's now consider two functions with side-effects:

```yul
function rev() -> r { revert(0, 0) }
function ret() -> r { return(0, 0) }
```

In the call below, the evaluation order determines whether the transaction will revert or terminate successfully.
In this case it should revert:

```yul
f(ret(), rev())
```

When faced with code like this, `FullInliner` was supposed to refrain from inlining.

> This would not decrease the effectiveness of the optimizer under normal circumstances, because the inliner

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This would not decrease the effectiveness of the optimizer under normal circumstances because the inliner
```

was meant to be paired with `ExpressionSplitter`, which ensures that arguments are always simple identifiers.

As a result of the bug, `FullInliner` would inline such a call regardless, doing it as if the

> arguments were identifiers and putting the argument expressions in an order different from the usual

Reviewer: ```suggestion
arguments were identifiers, and putting the argument expressions in an order different from the usual
```

Yul evaluation order:

```yul
_q := ret()
_p := rev()
let _c := mul(_q, 4)
let _r := add(_c, _p)
```

The inlined code above would now (incorrectly) terminate successfully instead of reverting.

## Effects of the Bug

> The bug has potential to alter behavior of a contract in a very significant way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bug has the potential to alter the behavior of a contract in a very significant way.
```

> Reordering reverts or returns may lead to storage writes, memory writes or event emissions not being performed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Reordering reverts or returns may lead to storage writes, memory writes, or event emissions not being performed.
```

It may also lead to the contract not reverting (and therefore not rolling back some operations) when
it should or vice-versa.

It is important to note that high-level Solidity code is unlikely to be affected unless the used optimizer

> sequence explicitly includes a step that actively transforms the code into non-expression-split form

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sequence explicitly includes a step that actively transforms the code into a non-expression-split form
```

"a" or "the" missing

(i.e. `ExpressionJoiner`) before `FullInliner`.

> In absence of this, triggering the bug would likely require inline assembly or a contract written in pure Yul.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the absence of this, triggering the bug would likely require inline assembly or a contract written in pure Yul.
```

This is because nested function calls in Solidity code are not directly transformed to nested calls
in generated Yul.

> The code generated by the IR pipeline is largely in the expression-split form, where each expression

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code generated by the IR pipeline is mainly in the expression-split form, where each expression
```

> is assigned to a separate variable, because code in this form is very easy to generate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is assigned to a separate variable because code in this form is very easy to generate.
```

> The compiler does generate calls in non-expression-split form in its own helper functions, but these

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The compiler does generate calls in a non-expression-split form in its own helper functions, but these
```

a or the missing.

> rarely have side-effects other than simple reverts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rarely have side effects other than simple reverts.
```

## Impact

The complex set of conditions required to trigger the bug makes it unlikely to occur in actually deployed contracts.

The use of custom optimizer sequences in the first place is uncommon.
The feature is intentionally not widely advertised.
Using it in a way that provides actual benefits is not easy.

> Anyone with enough knowledge to use it would be also likely to avoid inefficient sequences necessary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Anyone with enough knowledge to use it would also be likely to avoid inefficient sequences necessary
```

it's the other way around.

to trigger this bug.

Moreover, the bug will not affect the vast majority of Solidity code.

> Code most likely to be broken by it is inline assembly, which normally constitutes a small

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code most likely to be broken by it is inline assembly, which usually constitutes a small
```
Missing article.

portion of the whole contract.
The code also has to actually contain nested function calls with side-effects.

> Therefore, while the bug can have severe consequences, we think that the overall impact on real

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, while the bug can have severe consequences, the overall impact on real
```

For a stronger voice.

---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'FullInliner Non-Expression-Split Argument Evaluation Order Bug'
date: '2023-07-19'
author: Solidity Team
category: Security Alerts
---

On July 4, 2023, Robert Chen from OtterSec discovered a bug in Yul optimizer.

The earliest affected version of the compiler is 0.6.7, which introduced the ability to modify the
optimizer step sequence.
[Solidity version 0.8.21](https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/releases/tag/v0.8.21), released on July 19, 2023, provides a fix.

We assigned the bug an overall score of "low".

> The bug has "high" severity in affected cases, but we deem the likelihood of it actually affecting deployed contracts as "very low".

Author: Should it be high severity + very low likelihood? Or maybe something like high + low? We only really agreed on the overall score.

Author: Did we actually agree on likelihood?

Note that what I put in text was actually "very low".

Reviewer 3: I'd say it's very low, but then I don't really know which scale we used before, i.e. how coarse/fine grained it is? high medium low, or very high, high, medium, low, very low, etc? I'm personally fine with `very low`, but in that case we'll have to change the very last line of the blog post to reflect that as well (since there, it's `low if I remember correctly).

Author: You mean the `we think that the overall impact on real projects is low.` bit? That's the overall score.

Reviewer 3: Yes, that's what I meant, but I know get what you're saying as well, so yes, it's fine for it to remain `low` in this context (last line of blog post). Basically, the severity is high, the likelihood is very low, and thus the overall rating is low.

For example:

```yul
f(add(mload(0), mload(x)), mload(1))
```

The bytecode emitted for this expression will evaluate expressions in the following order:
- `mload(1)`
- `mload(x)`
- `mload(0)`
- `add(...)`
- `f(...)`

Note that the order does not matter when the expressions have no side-effects.
Even if `mload(0)` was evaluated before `mload(x)`, behavior of his code fragment would not change.

The introduction of side-effects, changes this:
```yul
function store(x, y) -> r {
    sstore(x, y)
    r := y
}

add(sload(0), store(0, k))
```

Evaluating `store()` after `sload()` in the code above would change the result.

### Expression-Split Form

The job of the expression splitter is to transform the code into a simpler form that is
easier for some other optimizer steps to work with and not affected by the choice of evaluation order.
This transformation involves evaluating call arguments first and storing the results in new variables.
Then those variables are passed to the call instead.

For example:

```yul
add(sload(0), store(0, k))
```

would be transformed into:

```yul
let _a := k
let _b := 0
let _x := store(_b, _a)
let _c := 0
let _y := sload(_c)
let _z := add(_y, _x)

> ```

Author: Note that these examples do no show actual compiler output. It's only meant to approximately illustrate what the step does.

avoid clashes with identifiers used in the surrounding code.

Yul has three kinds of expressions that can be used as call arguments:
- Literals (e.g. `0x42` or `0`)
- Identifiers (e.g. `k` or `ret`)
- Function calls (e.g. `f(x)` or `sstore(0, sload(x))`)

Let's consider a function `f()` defined as follows:

```yul
function f(a, b) -> r {
    let c := mul(a, 4)
    let r := add(c, b)
}
```

When called with a literal or an identifier, inlining is straigtforward:

```yul
let k := 0x42
f(24, k)
```

The call can be simply replaced with the body of the function as long as we take care to rename
variables to avoid name clashes:

```yul
let k := 0x42
let _q := 24
let _p := k
let _c := mul(_q, 4)
let _r := add(_c, _p)
```

Introducing function calls as arguments, however, requires paying more attention to the evaluation order.
Let's now consider two functions with side-effects:

```yul
function rev() -> r { revert(0, 0) }
function ret() -> r { return(0, 0) }
```

In the call below, the evaluation order determines whether the transaction will revert or terminate successfully.
In this case it should revert:

```yul
f(ret(), rev())
```

> When faced with code like this, `FullInliner`'s heuristics were supposed prevent inlining.

Reviewer 3: A nit pick regarding terminology: I don't think `heuristics` is the right name for this; it was supposed to be a hard rule that functions with function call arguments were not to be inlined (bug). Heuristics generally imply a more loosey-goosey trial and error approximate approach. In fact, I'd argue that the `FullInliner` steps uses absolutely no heuristics - it's literally just a set of hard rules, and not much else, no?

Author: But that's how we refer to those rules: https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/v0.8.20/libyul/optimiser/FullInliner.h#L76-L78

And if you look at them, they're definitely heuristics: https://github.com/ethereum/solidity/blob/v0.8.20/libyul/optimiser/FullInliner.cpp#L174-L228

There are some things you could consider hard rules in there, but there are also fuzzy criteria that take into account the number of arguments or the number of instructions. These numbers were chosen mostly using some trial and error and intuition.

The way I worded it is because `FullInliner::shallInline()` is where I added that check (and it seems like the best place for that). You could even argue that this check by itself is a heuristic too because the inliner could just as well be inlining these things, it's an arbitrary choice not to.

In any case, I reworded it not to mention heuristics.

sequence explicitly includes a step that actively transforms the code into non-expression-split form
(i.e. `ExpressionJoiner`) before `FullInliner`.

In absence of this, triggering the bug would likely require inline assembly or a contract written in pure Yul.
This is because nested function calls in Solidity code are not directly transformed to nested calls
in generated Yul.
The code generated by the IR pipeline is largely in the expression-split form, where each expression
is assigned to a separate variable, because code in this form is very easy to generate.
The compiler does generate calls in non-expression-split form in its own helper functions, but these
rarely have side-effects other than simple reverts.

## Impact

The complex set of conditions required to trigger the bug makes it unlikely to occur in actually deployed contracts.

The use of custom optimizer sequences in the first place is uncommon.
The feature is intentionally not widely advertised.
Using it in a way that provides actual benefits is not easy.
Anyone with enough knowledge to use it would be also likely to avoid inefficient sequences necessary
to trigger this bug.

> Morevoer, the bug will not affect vast majority of Soldity code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Morevoer, the bug will not affect the vast majority of Solidity code, if any.
```

Author: I don't think "if any" is warranted here. The point is that it will not affect most code other than inline assembly and inline assembly is not that rare. It's just usually a small part of the code.

> Code most likely to be broken by it is inline assembly, which normally constitutes a small

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Code most likely to be broken by it, is inline assembly, which normally constitutes a small
```

Author: Why would you put a comma here? It adds a stop at a really weird point in the sentence.

Reviewer 3: Sounds more natural to me, but is obviously not a deal breaker. Feel free to ignore.

Author: But I mean, this one seems actually incorrect :)

portion of the whole contract.
The code also has to actually contain nested function calls with side-effects.

> Therefore, while the bug can have severe consequences, we think that the overall impact on real

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Therefore, while this bug can have severe consequences, we think that the overall impact on real
```

Author: Why?

Reviewer 3: Because I like it better that way :D

Author: I think this one is fine as is :)
